Add maintainer FAQs (#17)
orcwg/cra-hub: faq.md

> This Regulation does not apply to natural or legal persons who contribute with source code to products with digital elements qualifying as free and open-source software that are not under their responsibility.

#### Q: Am I subject to the CRA if I maintain an open source project?

TODO: finalize text
It depends whether you're monetising it or not. If you are monetising it, then you are considered a manufacturer and subject to the obligations of manufacturers. Otherwise, you are not subject to the CRA.

#### Q: Am I subject to the CRA if I receive donations or sponsoring to support the development of the open source project that I maintain or contribute to?

TODO: finalize text

> No. As long as the revenue you receive cover development costs (including the cost of your labor), you're not considered to be monetising your project so are not subject to the CRA.

Reviewer: I don't think it is fair to say *no* this strongly, as I expect that most people actually try to make a (at least small) profit for precaution and general safety in life.

Reviewer 2: @bagder the CRA states "Accepting donations without the intention of making a profit should not be considered to be a commercial activity." Therefore, i would say that according to the CRA, if you try to make profit then you are considered to be in a commercial activity. Again this looks like a question that deserves clarification...

Reviewer 3: Yes, but I can receive donations and sell the product as well. Receiving donations is not the sole factor here. We need to reword this to indicate that if donations is your only source of income related to the open source work, you may not be subject to the CRA.

Reviewer 2: Yes this is exactly what the CRA states. However, what it does not clarify is what is the meaning of "intention of a making profit". So if you receive donations and sell the product, it is fine, and you are not covered by the CRA as long as you don't make profit with the sale of the product you are developing. And again, CRA applies to products. Therefore, on one hand, you could be considered as a manufactured for ONE product that you develop and on which you make profit and on the other hand you could be outside the scope of the CRA for a product developed without the intention of making profit and which development is financed by donations.

Reviewer 3: I see. This gets more implicated as we discuss it.

Reviewer 4: I think that if you are receiving donation on continous basis that constitute a profit, then it would be clear that the intention is no longer not making a profit (at least I guess that some court could consider it like that). Also selecting cost of the labour might be questionable (how can this be actually selected?). It might be worth to note that this would also apply on to self employed and not the case where additional company is used (e.g. limited UK company that would have some profit).

In general I would agree that we should not just say "no" but more "it depends"...

#### Q: Am I subject to the CRA if I sell support for an open source project I maintain?

TODO: finalize text

> If the revenue eanred by providing support only serves to cover cover development costs (including the cost of your labor), you're not considered to be monetising your project so are not subject to the CRA. However, if you're making a profit out of providing support, then you would be considered as amanufacturer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the revenue earned by providing support only serves to cover cover development costs (including the cost of your labor), you're not considered to be monetising your project so are not subject to the CRA. However, if you're making a profit out of providing support, then you would be considered as a manufacturer.
```

#### Q: What does monetizing an open source project mean in the context of the CRA?

TODO: finalize text
In the context of the CRA, monetizing means to make revenue from a project in excess of the cost of supporting the project's development, i.e., is a profit genersated from the activity. Labor is considered a cost, so getting paid to develop and maintain an open source project isn't generating a profit.

#### Q: As a maintainer if I monetize an open source project, what are my obligations in relation to the CRA?

TODO: finalize text

> As a maintainer, if you monetize an open source project (as described in [link to FAQ above][]), your are considered as a manufacturer from the perspective of the CRA, and subject to all of the obligations of a manufacturer.

Reviewer: > subject to all of the obligations of a manufacturer.

Does not have to be answered here, but this needs further details. This speaks of "obligations", but I would like to dig deeper as to what obligations these are and to *whom*. If I sold a service to company X but company Y uses my Open Source. Does it imply I have obligations to Y or just X? Or something in between?

Reviewer 2: I don't think we can say that monetization=manufacturer since the definition of manufacturer says otherwise (i.e. mentioned "free of charge" along with monetization". To be manufacturer you need to fulfill the others criteria laid down in the definition. The definition contains two cumulative conditions: the person has to manufacture (or have a product manufactured) and to market the product under his own name or trademark. So, if the product is marketed under another person’s name or trademark, this person will be considered as the manufacturer.

@bagder : Obligations of manufacturers can be read in article 13 of the CRA. With regard to whom a manufacturer would be responsible, the answer is: to everyone. When you are considered as manufacturer of product A you must fulfill all obligations laid down in article 13 of the CRA. It is not a question of contractual obligations towards other parties. If you are manufacturer of Product A you must ensure for example that this product is accompanied by the EU declaration of conformation every time someone downloads it.

Author: Thanks for the additional info, @Viko-legal. I'll split the question of manufacturer obligations into its own issue, but I'd lie to make sure we properly integrate the nuance you're adding to what turns a maintainer into a manufacturer. Any suggestions on how to do that?

Reviewer 2: Ok sorry for a this late reply, i did not see the follow-up. What I mean, to put it simple, is that monetization is just the proof of existence of a commercial activity but not the proof that the person monetizing a product is necessarily a manufacturer.

> This Regulation does not apply to natural or legal persons who contribute with source code to products with digital elements qualifying as free and open-source software that are not under their responsibility.

#### Q: Am I subject to the CRA if I maintain an open source project?

TODO: finalize text

> It depends whether you're monetising it or not. If you are monetising it, then you are considered a manufacturer and subject to the obligations of manufacturers. Otherwise, you are not subject to the CRA.

Reviewer 5: Would perhaps add after "monetising it" -"_, regardless wether you do so as a natural person or when a legal person (including an open source foundation) does this,_" ..

Reviewer 6: Agreed, although I think we may need to address #33 either here or in a separate question.

#### Q: Am I subject to the CRA if I receive donations or sponsoring to support the development of the open source project that I maintain or contribute to?

TODO: finalize text
No. As long as the revenue you receive cover development costs (including the cost of your labor), you're not considered to be monetising your project so are not subject to the CRA.

#### Q: Am I subject to the CRA if I sell support for an open source project I maintain?

TODO: finalize text
If the revenue earned by providing support only serves to cover cover development costs (including the cost of your labor), you're not considered to be monetising your project so are not subject to the CRA. However, if you're making a profit out of providing support, then you would be considered as a manufacturer.

#### Q: What does monetizing an open source project mean in the context of the CRA?

TODO: finalize text
In the context of the CRA, monetizing means to make revenue from a project in excess of the cost of supporting the project's development, i.e., is a profit genersated from the activity. Labor is considered a cost, so getting paid to develop and maintain an open source project isn't generating a profit.

> It's worth noting here that from an accounting perspective, your labor is a cost. So the money that goes to pay you a work wage (on which you're paying social taxes, etc.) isn't profit. What's profit is any extra money that would be left after you've paid yourself a reasonable work wage and covered all other work expenses (including an accountant, legal fees, social taxes, office space, etc.). The money you spend on living expenses, any personal savings you might make, etc., are taken out of the wages you're paying yourself and so are already accounted for as part of the cost of labor.

Author: @ilu33 expressed concerns about this phrasing here: https://github.com/orcwg/cra-hub/commit/4665b992634620d4e4de8a388bb11a376d2f49fb#commitcomment-151566283

We'd need to clarify our understanding before merging this.

Reviewer 7: Rather than referring to an "accounting perspective", one would prefer to see a reference to actual EU law on the subject. I realize that may not be possible, but otherwise it feels like we're walking into a situation like we did with the Blue Guide and "making available on the market", where the plain-language reading and the EU-statutory reading are not fully aligned.
